Initial documentation v6 (#163)
neo4j/docs-graphql: modules/ROOT/pages/migration/index.adoc

npm update @neo4j/graphql
----

== What's new

> Until version 5 of the Library, we tried to limit, as much as possible, the number of breaking changes and related migration pain. In the meantime, we introduced new features such as Aggregation, Fulltext search, Vector search, Connection API, and Interfaces&Union support, to name a few! This approach led to an inconsistent user-facing API with room for ambiguous behaviors.

Reviewer: Do we need this explanation here? It feels a bit like an excuse.

Author: We can remove it!

> Several moons ago, we introduced support for the GraphQL Cursor Connections Specification https://relay.dev/graphql/connections.htm / https://relay.dev/docs/tutorial/connections-pagination/.

Reviewer: Again, I think background info is not that relevant here

This was a great addition, not only added the Cursor-based pagination in the Library but also gave us the space to support relationship properties.

However, it created a diverse experience between the Connection API and the normal one, in some cases, even within the same query.

> === New Connection API 

Reviewer: As discussed, I would avoid giving a name here, this is just the API, not "Connection"

> To support relationship properties and Relay compatibility the new API is built on top of the Relay "GraphQL Cursor Connections Specification".

Reviewer: Maybe a link to Relay instead of just the name of the spec?

              name
            }
            properties {
              year
            }
          }
          pageInfo {
            hasNextPage
            endCursor
            hasPreviousPage
            startCursor
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Version 6:

```graphql
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors {
            connection(
              sort: [
                { edges: { properties: { year: ASC } } }
                { edges: { node: { name: ASC } } }
              ]
            ) {
              pageInfo {
                endCursor
                hasNextPage
                hasPreviousPage
                startCursor
              }
              edges {
                cursor
                node {
                  name
                }
                properties {
                  year
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Note how in version 6, the sort field `year` is now nested in the `properties` field while the field `name` is nested in the `node` field, and they are both part of the `edges` field.

=== Filtering 

> Filtering came with a lot of changes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Filtering comes with a lot of changes. 
```

In version 5, we used to define new filters by appending the name of the filter to the name of the field, like: `title_CONTAINS` or `title_STARTS_WITH`. 
In the past, that has meant that every new field added in a GraphQL type by the user is reflected in the creation of several input fields by the Library.  In version 6 property filters are generated to be shared across different fields of the same type.

> Here an examples of some of the new filters available:

Reviewer: Again, maybe reducing the amount of backstory. Focusing a bit more in the new rather than the old

Version 5:

```graphql
{
  moviesConnection(
    where: { actorsConnection_SOME: { node: { name: "Keanu Reeves" } } }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Version 6: 

```graphql
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        actors: { edges: { some: { node: { name: { equals: "Keanu Reeves" } } } } }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Note how in version 6, the filter `some` is not a suffix anymore but a nested field under the `edges` field.

*Relationship properties filters*

Filter all the movies where some actors have a screen time greater than 100 minutes:

Version 5:

```graphql
{
  moviesConnection(
    where: { actorsConnection_SOME: { edge: { screenTime_GT: 10 } } }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
```
Version 6:

```graphql
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        actors: {
          edges: { some: { properties: { screenTime: { gt: 1999 } } } }
        }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Why are we not using the tabs here? I see we are using them afterwards, and seems like a good idea here

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors {
            connection {
              edges {
                node {
                  name
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Note how the `connection` field is now a nested field in the `movies` field.

=== Pagination and Sorting

Pagination and sorting also changed in version 6.

*Top-level field pagination and sorting*

Version 5:
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesConnection(first: 10, after: "opaqueCursor", sort: [{ title: ASC }]) {
    pageInfo {
      endCursor
      hasNextPage
      hasPreviousPage
      startCursor
    }
    edges {
      cursor
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Version 6:
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection(
      first: 10
      after: "opaqueCursor"
      sort: [{ node: { title: ASC } }]
    ) {
      pageInfo {
        hasPreviousPage
        hasNextPage
        startCursor
        endCursor
      }
      edges {
        cursor
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> Note how in version 6, the sort field `title` is now nested in the `node` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note how in version 6, the sort field `title` is nested in the `node` field.
```

          first: 10
          after: "opaqueCursor"
          sort: [{ edge: { year: ASC } }, { node: { name: ASC } }]
        ) {
          edges {
            cursor
            node {
              name
            }
            properties {
              year
            }
          }
          pageInfo {
            hasNextPage
            endCursor
            hasPreviousPage
            startCursor
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Version 6:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors {
            connection(
              sort: [
                { edges: { properties: { year: ASC } } }
                { edges: { node: { name: ASC } } }
              ]
            ) {
              pageInfo {
                endCursor
                hasNextPage
                hasPreviousPage
                startCursor
              }
              edges {
                cursor
                node {
                  name
                }
                properties {
                  year
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> Note how in version 6, the sort field `year` is now nested in the `properties` field while the field `name` is nested in the `node` field, and they are both part of the `edges` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note how in version 6, the sort field `year` is nested in the `properties` field while the field `name` is nested in the `node` field, and they are both part of the `edges` field.
```

=== Filtering 

> In version 5, we used to define new filters by appending the name of the filter to the name of the field, like: `title_CONTAINS` or `title_STARTS_WITH`. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 5, we used to define new filters by appending the name of the filter to the name of the field, like: `title_CONTAINS` or `title_STARTS_WITH`.
```

Wondering if we can get rid of "we" -
Would it still make sense to say "Version 5 used to define..." ?

> In version 6 property filters are generated to be shared across different fields of the same type. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6 property filters are generated to be shared across different fields of the same type.
```

> Here an examples of some of the new filters available:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are examples of some of the new filters available:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
input StringWhere {
  AND: [StringWhere!]
  NOT: StringWhere
  OR: [StringWhere!]
  contains: String
  endsWith: String
  equals: String
  in: [String!]
  startsWith: String
}

input BooleanWhere {
  AND: [BooleanWhere!]
  NOT: BooleanWhere
  OR: [BooleanWhere!]
  equals: Boolean
}

input FloatWhere {
  AND: [FloatWhere!]
  NOT: FloatWhere
  OR: [FloatWhere!]
  equals: Float
  gt: Float
  gte: Float
  in: [Float!]
  lt: Float
  lte: Float
}
----

> *Property filters*

Reviewer 2: could this be a 4th level heading?

In version 5, you could filter by a field like this:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesConnection(where: { title_CONTAINS: "The Matrix" }) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> With the new filters in version 6, you can filter like this:

Reviewer 2: is this a new option or does the user have to do it like this?
if it's mandatory, remove "you can" to make it imperative

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        title: { contains: "The Matrix" }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> Note that in version 5, the equality operator came without any suffixes, and to filter `title` you would have done by the filter `{ title: "The Matrix" }` while in version 6 the filter is moved in the nested input under the operator `equals` as: `{ title: { equals: "The Matrix" } }`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that in version 5, the equality operator did not have a suffix and to check `title` for equality you had to use a filter like `{ title: "The Matrix" }`.
In version 6 the filter is moved to the nested input under the operator `equals` as: `{ title: { equals: "The Matrix" } }`.
```

> *Relationship filters*

Reviewer 2: see above, could this be a 4th level heading?

> The same approach is also embraced by relationship filters.

Reviewer 2: i'd say we can remove this sentence

Filter all the movies that have at least one actor with the name "Keanu Reeves":

Version 5:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  moviesConnection(
    where: { actorsConnection_SOME: { node: { name: "Keanu Reeves" } } }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Version 6: 

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        actors: { edges: { some: { node: { name: { equals: "Keanu Reeves" } } } } }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Note how in version 6, the filter `some` is not a suffix anymore but a nested field under the `edges` field.

> *Relationship properties filters*

Reviewer 2: see above, can this be a 4th level heading?

Filter all the movies where some actors have a screen time greater than 100 minutes:

Version 5:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  moviesConnection(
    where: { actorsConnection_SOME: { edge: { screenTime_GT: 10 } } }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Version 6:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        actors: {
          edges: { some: { properties: { screenTime: { gt: 1999 } } } }
        }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> Note that in version 5, you had available two ways to filter relationships, one input that mimics the Connection API and the other that mimics the normal API without having access to the properties of the relationship. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that in version 5, you had available two ways to filter relationships: one input that mimics the Connection API and the other that mimics the normal API without having access to the properties of the relationship. 
```

do we have examples for that in the v5 docs? links might be helpful

> In version 6, the filters are unified, and the relationship properties are nested under the `properties` field. If before you had `actors_SOME` and `actorsConnection_SOME`, now you have only `actors` with the nested field `edges`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6 the filters are unified, and the relationship properties are nested under the `properties` field.
If before you had `actors_SOME` and `actorsConnection_SOME`, now you have only `actors` with the nested field `edges`.
```

== Breaking changes

Here is a list of all the breaking changes from version 5.0.0 to 6.0.0.

=== Connection fields are now a nested field

> In version 6 the connection fields as `movieConnection` are moved to a nested field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6 the connection fields, such as `movieConnection`, become nested fields.
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesConnection {
    edges {
      node {
        actorsConnection {
          edges {
            node {
              name
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors {
            connection {
              edges {
                node {
                  name
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

=== Top-level Query fields have changed

> In version 5, it was supported two ways to return `movies`, one with the Connection API with the operation field `moviesConnection` and the other with the normal API with the operation field `movies`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Version 5 supports two ways of returning `movies`, one via the Connection API with the operation field `moviesConnection` and the other via the normal API with the operation field `movies`.
```

> In version 6, the operation field `movies`  is used to wrap the new Connection API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Version 6 wraps the new Connection API with the operation field `movies`.
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    title
    actors {
      name
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors {
            connection {
              edges {
                node {
                  name
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

=== Shareable property filters

In version 6, property filters are moved to a shared input type.

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(where: { title_CONTAINS: "The Matrix" }) {
    title
    actors {
      name
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        title: { contains: "The Matrix" }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

=== Top-level node filters are moved to the `node` field

> In version 6, Top-level node filters are moved inside the input named `node`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6, top-level node filters are moved inside the input named `node`.
```

----
|===

=== Relationship properties filters are moved to the `properties` input part of the `edges` field

In version 6, relationship properties filters are moved inside the input named `properties`.

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  moviesConnection {
    edges {
      node {
        title
        actorsConnection(where: { edge: { screenTime: 130 } }) {
          edges {
            node {
              name
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors(where: { edges: { properties: { screenTime: { equals: 130 } } } }) {
            connection {
              edges {
                node {
                  name
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

=== Filter by relationship is changed

In version 6, the syntax to filter by relationship has changed.

> from `actors_SOME` and `actorsConnection_SOME`, where `_SOME` could be any of the following operators `_SOME` / `_NONE` / `_ALL` / `_SINGLE`,
> to `actors` followed by the operator `some` / `none` / `all` / `single` nested under the `edges` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The version 5 filters `actors_SOME` and `actorsConnection_SOME`, where `_SOME` could be any of the following operators `_SOME` / `_NONE` / `_ALL` / `_SINGLE` become `actors` followed by the operator `some` / `none` / `all` / `single` nested under the `edges` field in version 6.
```

do "actors_SOME" and "actorsConnection_SOME" both become "actors { edges {some {...}}}" ?

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  moviesConnection(
    where: { actorsConnection_SOME: { node: { name: "Keanu Reeves" } } }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        actors: { edges: { some: { node: { name: { equals: "Keanu Reeves" } } } } }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

> === `_NOT` operator is no longer supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== The `_NOT` operator is no longer supported
```

> In version 5, you can use a deprecated syntax sugar to negate the filter by adding the suffix `_NOT`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 5, you can use deprecated syntax  to negate the filter by adding the suffix `_NOT`.
```

> In version 6 this syntax is no longer supported, and instead, it has moved completely to the logical operator `NOT`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6 this syntax is no longer supported.
Use the logical operator `NOT` instead.
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  moviesConnection(
    where: { actorsConnection_SOME: { node: { name_NOT_CONTAINS: "Keanu Reeves" } } }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(
    where: {
      node: {
        actors: { edges: { some: { node: { name: { NOT: { contains: "Keanu Reeves" } } } } } }
      }
    }
  ) {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

> === Top-Level sort fields are now nested under the `node` field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Top-level sort fields are now nested in the `node` field
```

> In version 6, the sort fields are now nested under the `node` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6, the sort fields are nested in the `node` field.
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesConnection(first: 10, after: "opaqueCursor", sort: [{ title: ASC }]) {
    pageInfo {
      endCursor
      hasNextPage
      hasPreviousPage
      startCursor
    }
    edges {
      cursor
      node {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection(
      first: 10
      after: "opaqueCursor"
      sort: [{ node: { title: ASC } }]
    ) {
      pageInfo {
        hasPreviousPage
        hasNextPage
        startCursor
        endCursor
      }
      edges {
        cursor
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

> === Nested field sort fields are now nested under the `edges` field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Nested field sort fields are nested in the `edges` field
```

> In version 6, the sort fields are now nested under the `edges` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6, the sort fields are nested in the `edges` field.
```

> Relationship properties are moved then inside `properties`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Relationship properties are  then moved added under `properties`.
```

          after: "opaqueCursor"
          sort: [{ edge: { year: ASC } }, { node: { name: ASC } }]
        ) {
          edges {
            cursor
            node {
              name
            }
            properties {
              year
            }
          }
          pageInfo {
            hasNextPage
            endCursor
            hasPreviousPage
            startCursor
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    connection {
      edges {
        node {
          title
          actors {
            connection(
              sort: [
                { edges: { properties: { year: ASC } } }
                { edges: { node: { name: ASC } } }
              ]
            ) {
              pageInfo {
                endCursor
                hasNextPage
                hasPreviousPage
                startCursor
              }
              edges {
                cursor
                node {
                  name
                }
                properties {
                  year
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

=== `@node`

> The directive `@node` is now required to define a Neo4j node, all the types that are not annotated with the `@node` directive will not be considered to be a Neo4j node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The directive `@node` is now required to define a Neo4j node.
Types which are not annotated with the `@node` directive are not considered Neo4j nodes.
```

For example:

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
  title: String
  actors: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: IN)
}

type Person {
  name: String
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String
  actors: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: IN)
}

type Person @node {
  name: String
}

----
|===

> === `@relationship` can only describe n to n relationships

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== `@relationship` can only describe n-to-n relationships
```

> The directive `@relationship` cannot anymore describe a 1 to 1 relationship as it was in version 5.0.0. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The directive `@relationship` can no longer describe a one-to-one relationship as in version 5. 
```

Reviewer 2: how would a user do that in v6 then?

> The directive `@relationship` cannot anymore describe a 1 to 1 relationship as it was in version 5.0.0. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The directive `@relationship` can no longer describe a one-to-one relationship as in version 5. 
```

This is due to a Neo4j limitation that does not support cardinality enforcement.

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Before | Now

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
  title: String
  director: Person! @relationship(type: "DIRECTED", direction: IN)
}

type Person {
  name: String
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String
  director: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "DIRECTED", direction: IN)
}

type Person @node {
  name: String
}

----
|===

=== The `@unique` argument `constraintName` is now required

> In version 5, the library inferred the constraint name by the type of type and field where the `@unique` directive was applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 5, the library inferred the constraint name by the type of type and field where the `@unique` directive was applied.
```

"type of type and field" - is that correct?
what does it mean?

> In version 6, the constraint name has to be specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 6, you must specify the constraint name.
```
